# Prosper-Loan-Data-Analysis
## by Saad Bin Zubaeir


## Dataset

> The Prosper loan dataset includes information on 113,937 peer-to-peer loans facilitated by the credit company Prosper. The dataset includes 81 variables for each loan, including the date the loan was created, the loan number, the loan term, the current status of the loan, the borrower's APR and rate, the Prosper rating and score, and various other details about the borrower and the loan. The dataset covers loans made between 2009 and 2014 and includes information about the borrower, such as their income, employment status, and credit score, as well as information about the loan itself, such as the loan amount and the interest rate. Some data cleaning was done to make sure that the analysis and visualization were accurate and trustworthy.


## Summary of Findings

> This study aimed to investigate factors that affect borrower rate and loan amount in the Prosper loan dataset. The majority of loans in the dataset were found to be current, with 23.2% being completed loans and 8% being charged off or defaulted. The ProsperScore, a custom risk score ranging from 1-10 with 10 being the best or lowest risk score, had a bell-shaped distribution with the highest count of 12,595 borrowers for score 4 and 12,503 borrowers for score 8. BorrowerAPR was found to be slightly higher than BorrowerRate, which makes sense due to additional fees such as mortgage, insurance, and closing costs. Prosper rating C had the highest frequency with 21.6% of total loans, while rating AA had the lowest frequency with 6.3%. Most of the borrowers were employed, and more non-employed individuals were issued loans than those with part-time jobs. Most Prosper borrowers had a debt to income ratio around 30%, with debt consolidation being the most common loan type, followed by home improvement and business loans. The most common loan term was 36 months or 3 years, followed by 60 months or 5 years, and very few borrowers had taken 12-month loans. Borrower rate was found to have increased significantly from 2009 to 2011 and dropped sharply from 2012. Borrowers with higher incomes, employment status, and who own a house tend to have lower rates than those with lower incomes, unemployment, and no homeownership. Prosper score, rating, wage, employment status, and homeownership were found to have a strong relation to borrower rate and APR. Short-term loans had a lower APR than long-term loans, and Prosper rating and loan status were found to affect the borrower APR, with AA and A ratings having the lowest APR and E and HR ratings having the highest APR. Charged off and defaulted loans had a higher APR than current and past-due loans. The loan original amount was found to be affected by income range, homeownership, and Prosper rating, with high-income borrowers who own a house having a loan original amount of around $10k to $35K. Borrowers with HR rating, even with high income, had a very high rate.


## Key Insights for Presentation

> I selected key plots with a high amount of data displayed for my presentation. The plots I chose demonstrate the distribution of important variables such as loan status, monthly income, and Prosper rating, borrowerRate, borrowerAPR and I used them to tell a story about what major factors predict loan status and Prosper rating. In the presentation, I focused on what impacted interest rate and loan amount. I began by introducing the loan status, then borrowing rate effected by prosper score and prosper rating, then loan amount effected by income and home ownership varriables through displaying their distribution. Then, I used violin plots, box plots, to further examine the relationship between my variables of interest (interest rate and loanstatus, loan amount) and the explanatory variables.